Model interpretation (#693)
mlr-org/mlr3book: book/chapters/chapter12/model_interpretation.qmd

We will focus on methods implemented in three R packages that nicely interface with `mlr3`: `r ref_pkg("iml")` (@sec-iml), `r ref_pkg("counterfactuals")` (@sec-counterfactuals), and `r ref_pkg("DALEX")` (@sec-dalex).

`iml` and `DALEX` offer similar functionality but differ in design choices in that `iml` makes use of the `R6` class system whereas `DALEX` is based on the S3 class system.
`counterfactuals` also uses the `R6` class system.
In contrast to `iml` and `counterfactuals`, `DALEX` focuses on comparing multiple predictive models, usually of different types.
We will only provide a brief overview of the methodology discussed below, we recommend @Molnar2022 as a comprehensive introductory book about IML.

As a running example throughout this chapter, we will consider an gradient boosting machine (GBM) fit on half the features in the `"german_credit"` task.
In practice, we would tune the hyperparameters of GBM as discussed in @sec-optimization and perform feature selection as discussed in @sec-feature-selection to select the most relevant features. 

> However, for the sake of simplicity, we opted to utilize an untuned GBM for the `"german_credit"` task, considering that it exhibited satisfactory performance even without fine-tuning, saving the reader valuable time and resources when running the example code below:

Reviewer: saving the reader valuable time and resources when running the example code below: --> remove

Hence, conclusions drawn from the surrogate model are valid if the surrogate model approximates the black-box model very well (i.e., if the model fidelity is high). 
It is therefore important to measure and report also the approximation error of the surrogate model.

The data used to train the black-box model may be very complex or limited, making it challenging to directly train a well-performing interpretable model on that data. 
Having trained a black-box model that captures the relationships in the original data very well, enables us to generate new labeled data in specific regions of the input space with which we can augment the original data.
<!-- During this 'surrogate data generation' process the predictions of the black-box model serve as labels. -->
The augmented data can then be used to train an interpretable model that captures and explains the relationships learned by the black-box model (in specific regions) or to identify flaws or unexpected behavior.
<!-- Surrogate data generation allows for the benefits of both the accuracy of the black-box model and the interpretability of the resulting interpretable model. -->

> <!-- The black-box model acts as a powerful predictor, providing labels for the artificially generated data, while the interpretable model can offer a better understanding in the targeted regions of the input space. -->

Reviewer 2: @mllg @giuseppec I'm sorry but I don't follow this at all, and I'm not entirely sure it's relevance to the chapter.
Why are we now talking about artifically generated data?

Reviewer: because artficially generated data is used to train the surrogate?

Reviewer 2: Okay I don't think that was said before or really here, how about:

> The data used to train the black-box model may be very complex or limited, making it challenging to directly train a well-performing interpretable model on that data. 
Instead, we can use the black-box model to generate new labeled data in specific regions of the input space with which we can augment the original data.
The augmented data can then be used to train an interpretable model that captures and explains the relationships learned by the black-box model (in specific regions) or to identify flaws or unexpected behavior.

Reviewer: probably fine

Inspecting the surrogate model can provide insights into the behavior of a black-box model, for example by looking at the model coefficients in a linear regression or splits in a decision tree.
We differentiate between local surrogate models, which approximate a model locally around a specific data point of interest, and global surrogate models which approximate the model across the entire input space (@Ribeiro2016lime; @Molnar2022).

The features used to train a surrogate model are usually the same features used to train the black-box model or at least data with the same distribution to ensure a representative input space.
However, the target used to train the surrogate model is the predictions obtained from the black-box model, not the real outcome of the underlying data.
Hence, conclusions drawn from the surrogate model are only valid if the surrogate model approximates the black-box model very well (i.e., if the model fidelity is high).
It is therefore also important to measure and report the approximation error of the surrogate model.

> The data used to train the black-box model may be very complex or limited, making it challenging to directly train a well-performing interpretable model on that data.
> Having trained a black-box model that captures the relationships in the original data very well, enables us to generate new labeled data in specific regions of the input space with which we can augment the original data.
> <!-- During this 'surrogate data generation' process the predictions of the black-box model serve as labels. -->
> The augmented data can then be used to train an interpretable model that captures and explains the relationships learned by the black-box model (in specific regions) or to identify flaws or unexpected behavior.
> <!-- Surrogate data generation allows for the benefits of both the accuracy of the black-box model and the interpretability of the resulting interpretable model. -->
> <!-- The black-box model acts as a powerful predictor, providing labels for the artificially generated data, while the interpretable model can offer a better understanding in the targeted regions of the input space. -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data used to train the black-box model may be very complex or limited, making it challenging to directly train a well-performing interpretable model on that data.
Instead, we can use the black-box model to generate new labeled data in specific regions of the input space with which we can augment the original data.
The augmented data can then be used to train an interpretable model that captures and explains the relationships learned by the black-box model (in specific regions) or to identify flaws or unexpected behavior.
```

Below, we pass `maxdepth = 2` to the constructor to build a tree with two binary splits, yielding four terminal nodes.

```{r iml-globalsurrogate,message=FALSE}
tree_surrogate = TreeSurrogate$new(predictor, maxdepth = 2L)
```

Before inspecting this model, we need to first check if the surrogate model approximates the prediction model accurately, which we can assess by comparing the predictions of the tree surrogate and the predictions of the black-box model.
For example, we could quantify the number of matching predictions and measure the accuracy of the surrogate in predicting the predictions of the black-box GBM model:

```{r iml-crosstable}
pred_surrogate = tree_surrogate$predict(credit_x, type = "class")$.class
pred_surrogate = factor(pred_surrogate, levels = c("good", "bad"))
pred_gbm = lrn_gbm$predict_newdata(credit_x)$response
confusion = mlr3measures::confusion_matrix(pred_surrogate, pred_gbm, positive = "good")

> print(confusion)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
confusion
```

```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- FIXME: RS CHECK PRINTOUT ABOVE -->
```

First, we check if the predictions for Charlie match:

```{r}
c(gbm = gbm_predict[[1]], local = local_surrogate$predict()[[1]])
```

Ideally, we should assess the fidelity of the surrogate model in the local neighborhood of Charlie, i.e., how well the local surrogate model approximates the predictions of the black-box GBM model for multiple data points in the vicinity of Charlie.
A practical approach to assess this local model fidelity involves generating artificial data points within Charlie's local neighborhood (and potentially applying distance-based weighting) or selecting the $k$ nearest neighbors from the original data.
For illustration purposes, we now quantify the approximation error using the mean absolute error calculated from the 10 nearest neighbors (including Charlie) according to the Gower distance (@gower1971general):

```{r}
ind_10nn = gower::gower_topn(Charlie, credit_x, n = 10)$index[, 1]
Charlie_10nn = credit_x[ind_10nn, ]

gbm_pred_10nn = predictor$predict(Charlie_10nn)[[1]]
local_pred_10nn = local_surrogate$predict(Charlie_10nn)[[1]]
mean(abs(gbm_pred_10nn - local_pred_10nn))
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- FIXME: RS CHECK PRINTOUT -->
```

The exact computation of Shapley values is time consuming, as it involves taking into account all possible combinations of features to calculate the marginal contribution of a feature. 
Therefore, the estimation of Shapley values is often approximated.
The `sample.size` argument (default is `sample.size = 100`) can be increased to obtain a more accurate approximation of exact Shapley values.

```{r iml-006}
#| fig-height: 3
#| fig-cap: Shapley values for Charlie. The actual prediction (0.63) displays the prediction of the model for the observation we are interested in, the average prediction (0.71) displays the average prediction over the given test dataset. Each horizontal bar is the Shapley value (phi) for the given feature.
#| fig-alt: 10 bar plots of Shapley values, one for each feature. x-axis says 'phi' and ranges from -0.1 to 0.05. The strongest positive contribution is from 'purpose=furniture/equipment; 'other_debtors=none' has the smallest value, and 'status=no checking account' is the strongest negative contribution.
#| label: fig-iml-shapley
shapley = Shapley$new(predictor, x.interest = Charlie, sample.size = 1000)
shapley$plot()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: <!-- FIXME: RS CHECK ALT TEXT -->

The exact computation of Shapley values is time consuming, as it involves taking into account all possible combinations of features to calculate the marginal contribution of a feature. 
Therefore, the estimation of Shapley values is often approximated.
The `sample.size` argument (default is `sample.size = 100`) can be increased to obtain a more accurate approximation of exact Shapley values.

```{r iml-006}
#| fig-height: 3
#| fig-cap: Shapley values for Charlie. The actual prediction (0.63) displays the prediction of the model for the observation we are interested in, the average prediction (0.71) displays the average prediction over the given test dataset. Each horizontal bar is the Shapley value (phi) for the given feature.
#| fig-alt: 10 bar plots of Shapley values, one for each feature. x-axis says 'phi' and ranges from -0.1 to 0.05. The strongest positive contribution is from 'purpose=furniture/equipment; 'other_debtors=none' has the smallest value, and 'status=no checking account' is the strongest negative contribution.
#| label: fig-iml-shapley
shapley = Shapley$new(predictor, x.interest = Charlie, sample.size = 1000)
shapley$plot()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- fixme: rs check alt text -->
```

knitr::include_graphics("Figures/counterfactuals.png", dpi = 600)
```

A simple counterfactual method is the `r index('What-If', aside = TRUE, lower = FALSE)` approach (@Wexler2019) where, for a given prediction to explain, the counterfactual is the closest data point in the dataset with the desired prediction.

> Obviously, if we do not restrict ourselves to a fixed dataset, many possible counterfactual data points can exist, as there are many ways to achieve a desired prediction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we do not restrict ourselves to a fixed dataset then many possible counterfactual data points can exist as there are many ways to achieve a desired prediction.
```

> However, the approach by @Wexler2019 only produces a single counterfactual explanation, as many other early counterfactual methods (see @guidotti2022counterfactual for a comprehensive overview).

Reviewer 2: @mllg @giuseppec I think there's a typo here, I can't follow this sentence

Reviewer: rewrite like this:
A simple counterfactual method is the `r index('What-If', aside = TRUE, lower = FALSE)` approach (@Wexler2019) where, for a given prediction to explain, the counterfactual is the closest data point in the dataset with the desired prediction.
Usually, many possible counterfactual data points can exist. However, the approach by @Wexler2019, and many other early counterfactual methods for that matter (see @guidotti2022counterfactual for a comprehensive overview), only produce a single, somewhat arbitrary counterfactual explanation, which can be regarded as problematic when counterfactuals are used for insights or actions against the model.

knitr::include_graphics("Figures/counterfactuals.png", dpi = 600)
```

> A simple counterfactual method is the `r index('What-If', aside = TRUE, lower = FALSE)` approach (@Wexler2019) where, for a given prediction to explain, the counterfactual is the closest data point in the dataset with the desired prediction.
> If we do not restrict ourselves to a fixed dataset then many possible counterfactual data points can exist as there are many ways to achieve a desired prediction.
> However, the approach by @Wexler2019 only produces a single counterfactual explanation, as many other early counterfactual methods (see @guidotti2022counterfactual for a comprehensive overview).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A simple counterfactual method is the `r index('What-If', aside = TRUE, lower = FALSE)` approach (@Wexler2019) where, for a given prediction to explain, the counterfactual is the closest data point in the dataset with the desired prediction.
Usually, many possible counterfactual data points can exist.
However, the approach by @Wexler2019, and several other early counterfactual methods (see @guidotti2022counterfactual for a comprehensive overview), only produce a single, somewhat arbitrary counterfactual explanation, which can be regarded as problematic when counterfactuals are used for insights or actions against the model.
```

3) Only require changes in a few features; and
4) Originate from the same distribution as the observations in the given dataset.

In MOC, all four objectives are optimized simultaneously via a multi-objective optimization method.

> Conversely, several other counterfactual methods rely on single-objective optimization methods, where multiple objectives are combined into a single objective, e.g., using a weighted sum. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several other counterfactual methods rely on single-objective optimization methods, where multiple objectives are combined into a single objective, e.g., using a weighted sum. 
```
